Let's go back to Jim in Canton, Ohio.
You were talking about publishing electronically and the taxes on that, Jim.
What was the point you wanted to bring up with Nicholas?
No, well, you confused the point.
I'm sorry.
That's all right.
Just to briefly reprise, when I decided to publish my own memoir before I go with Ex Libris, which is Random House's on-demand electronic publishing service,
You know, the tax laws kept people from holding back lists, the bookstores and the suppliers.
Well, what I'm getting at is, is this a middle way?
In other words, X copies of my memoir will be out there, and family, friends, colleagues, and so forth, and maybe the local newspaper will push a few.
But in addition to that, the fact that the book is in an online format, doesn't that kind of obviate all of the various floppy disks, DVDs, softwares, memory cards problems?
What you mean is by making a print-on-demand hard copy, is that what you're saying?
Yeah.
Well, it certainly works to keep a book in print, and that's one of the arguments that the publishing industry puts out for holding copyrights.
A lot of authors like myself...
are concerned that this is one way a publisher can say well your book is still in print even even if it's not well and when somebody might request an on-demand copy they can produce a paperback version and that's kind of coming and i'm kind of i i have to confess i'm ambivalent on the subject i'm all for staying in print one way or another but i'm also for trying to find a new life for you for your material if your previous publisher's not interested in it i don't know if that's kind of the answer you're looking for
But I do believe that it's a very interesting frontier, print-on-demand, because it does give us a hard copy of the book.
Here's a caller, David, who says he's a little disturbed by the fact that you have 15,000 books, many of which are in storage.
He says, I make it a point to keep my personal library minimal.
Rather, I resell my books on Amazon...
and other venues to keep them moving, keep them circulating.
I think that's better than boxing them unless they are rare books that would otherwise be lost to the world.
Well, I think that's wonderful that you're circulating your books, that you're finding a new home for them.
Again, as I said, I'm rescuing a lot of these books.
These are two steps away from the pulping plant.
And these are low-usage books that I have in storage, and I can assure you none of them are rarities, but the practical fact of the matter is I have no room.
So they have to be in storage?
Some of these books, we're not talking about great rarities in storage.
We're just talking about books that I'm giving a new lease on life.
To Detroit, Michigan, and to Mike, good morning to you.
Hey, I guess my question is that I have read somewhere
that in the times of Asia, Asia, Egypt, and also during the times of election of the great, there were multiple libraries that were burned in Egypt.
And I'm wondering.
Oh, dear.
I'm afraid.
Are you there, Mike?
He was getting to the point of a good question.
Yeah, I thought so, too.
Let's see if I can.
How did destruction of Egypt affect African civilizations?
I don't have a good answer for that.
I mean, Alexandria was in Egypt, of course, but I'm not so sure if that's the library that he's talking about.
Alexandria was destroyed, and apparently on multiple occasions, and I don't want to get into the politics of that one, but we certainly know what was lost there, a great store of classical knowledge which was considered pagan by both Christians and Muslims.
But I think the thrust of his question was other libraries that might have been in other parts of Africa.
The Timbuktu, for instance, was a legendary library there.
And if all the stories you read about that are true, then yes, of course, it would have severely impacted African culture had it been destroyed.
All right.
Let's go to Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Good morning, Paula.
Good morning.
How are you today?
Fine, thanks.
It's a pleasure listening to your show today every day.
Thank you.
But I must tell your guest there this morning that I have to thank him.
You've made me feel so much better about myself today.
Thank you, Paula.
Because I am an avid cookbook collector.
I'm a chef also.
And my friends and my family have teased me terribly because about three years ago I finally stopped keeping count when I hit about 650 cookbooks.
And I have rescued cookbooks I have been going back into the early 1900s
And my friends are quite fascinated with my collection, but people are like, what do you mean you bought another cookbook?
How many of them are in active use, Paula?
For me?
Well, first off, I've read every one of them that I've had.
Oh, good.
They're fun to read.
One of the few collectors I've ever heard or met that has actually read every book in your collection.
Yeah, it's wonderful.
Well, you know, and as far as active use, I do a lot of culinary research.
It's my hobby.
I like to say my hobby is culinary anthropology.
I actually found out that Boston University started offering a... I'm writing that down, by the way.
Go ahead.
Culinary anthropology.
That's a good one.
Well, and I've had a wonderful... Through my own context, I've been able to discuss my theories and such with some people from the Smithsonian who have agreed with my theories on civilizations and food and how impacted civilization has been by the food supply, and as the food supply got better, the civilization moved forward.
And I've done a lot of research to this point.
Well, maybe you're ready to write your own book, don't you think?
I have been working on a couple proposals, as it is.
Good.
Paula, read in my book, A Gentle Madness, about Chef Louis Zafmary, S-C-A-T-H-M-A-R-Y.
He was a chef in Chicago, and he had 250,000 culinary artifacts, not just books, but artifacts, which now are the principal reference materials at no fewer than six major institutions, Johnson & Wales and the
In Rhode Island, the University of Iowa has his antiquarian cookbooks.
A fascinating guy.
I don't remember how many tractor trailers it took to move the stuff from Chicago to Rhode Island, but it was like 200,000 objects.
Good luck to you, Paula.
Good luck, Paula.
Thanks for the call.
Nicholas, you need four needs.
I need to hear you talk about your own background, about your own childhood, about your own interest in books, and how it became as intense as it is now.
When I was appointed literary editor of the Worcester, Massachusetts Sunday Telegram in 1978,
I said, what a wonderful opportunity it would be to just indulge my obsession, which is for books, to continue a liberal arts education.
But what happened as a kid?
I mean, what were you doing then?
My dear mother said, I've been talking about writing a book from the time I could start to read.
Really?
copying in a notebook the the iliad and she said what are you doing i said i'm writing a book she said well that's not really exactly how we do it but but but you know but isn't that the way artists begin by copying the great artists well but i wanted to to produce something i i had an old roommate when i was uh in the navy a
on an aircraft carrier, and a good friend of mine, Gene Hester, out in California, and he reminded me, we were out in L.A.
together a couple weeks ago, he said, you know, you always said when we were bouncing around in the Pacific Ocean on that aircraft carrier, Gene, I'm going to write a book, I'm going to write a book, and I have to say, you and I, Diane, were talking between, at one of the breaks, you have 15,000 inscribed books,
that have been presented to you in this program, and they're now at McDaniel College in Westminster.
I have a similar kind of alchemy work with me.
When I was the literary editor for the Worcester Telegram and Gazette, I used to do a weekly interview with authors, and I would go to Boston.
And over a period of 22 years, because when I left the paper, I continued to do this freelance...
I would always end the interview by asking the author to inscribe a book for me.
And then I kind of crossed the line, you know, when I was interviewing Joseph Heller, for instance.
It wasn't enough to do the novel God Knows.
I had to have a catch-22 with me.
I remember he said to me, too bad you don't have a catch-22 in Dusty.
Well, I did.
And he wrote in it, and I've said this before, for Nick Basbanes, who treasures his first editions, I only wish I had a first edition copy of this book, you know, and it was a cute little story.
But that kind of helped me cross the line from being a writer about books and book culture to being...
passionate about the artifact and collecting but to answer your question I've always I can't remember a time when I haven't loved books and I was asked the other day do you take a book with you everywhere I mean except to the post office but any place where I'm I expect to have to be more than 30 minutes like the doctor or the dentist or the barbershop you take a book absolutely let's go to Silver Spring Maryland good morning Alexandra
Good morning.
This has been such a pleasure to listen to.
Oh, good.
I have so many comments now, but the one I called about actually brings us back to earlier in the conversation.
Mr. Beth Baines, you were talking about your daughters and your collection and how they feel about your collection.
And I, in the last few years, saw both of my parents, and my father was a writer.
He was William H. White, and he wrote The Organization Man and then some other things after that.
Excellent.
And so he was an avid reader and collector of books.
And so I was faced with, his collection was not nearly as big as yours, but I was faced with a collection of 3,000 plus or minus books.
By choice books, Alba.
I needed to figure out what to do with.
And I just wanted to sort of make the comment that any people out there who are avid book collectors,
for them to think about that, what their loved ones, what they would like their loved ones to do with their collections, because I was really faced with it.
That's an excellent point.
And Diane, of course, what have you done with your books?
Well, I wanted to pass them on to young people who would have the opportunity to hold in their hands.
a signed book.
But you've also given them to an institution where everyone can have access to them.
So what Diane has done with her books is almost a perfect answer to the point that you raise.
Yeah, absolutely.
I thank you for calling, Alexandra.
Have a nice day.
Thank you.
At six minutes before the hour, you're listening to The Diane Rehm Show.
And to San Antonio, Texas.
Good morning, Rebecca.
Good morning.
Hi.
One of my favorite books as both a youngster and as an adult now is Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451, which I think is the ultimate combination of a totalitarian society that focuses on burning all books.
And in the book, people memorize books in order to save them from burning so that at least the book survives and they hide themselves away from the
firemen and memorize a book and they become known as that book.
And I was just wondering what you, Diane, and you, Nicholas, might choose to be if you were in a position like that.
I have a hard time deciding what I would do.
Well, I'll take it instantly.
It's the works of William Shakespeare.
If I were responsible for preserving one book and I had one to choose, it would have to be the 36 plays that you find in the first folio of Shakespeare.
That would be mine.
I'd probably, if I had one book to choose, would choose the King James Version of the Bible.
I was just going to say that was going to be my second choice.
I was about to even say it before you said it.
Good for you.
Those are the two, though.
I think if we take those two, you're pretty well set.
You're covered.
I think so.
The King James Bible, the only great work of art produced by a committee.
I mean, if you think about it, the King James version of the Bible, which is absolutely beautiful.
So gorgeous in its literature and so mind-boggling in the imaginative qualities it can bring to the fore.
I thank you for that question, Rebecca.
So what comes next, Nicholas?
You've got this trilogy.
Well, the trilogy now threatens to be a quartet.
I had that feeling because you still have so much more to say.
Well, ultimately, if you deal with preservation and you deal with collecting and you deal with libraries and you deal with destruction, we're dealing with book culture, but ultimately you have to deal with the reader.
And what are books for?
Ultimately, it's for people.
And so I do have a book under contract with Harper's.
And the title tentatively is Every Book Its Reader.
And it will just explore any number of reading issues.
And I know there have been plenty of reading books.
And people give me this vacant look.
They say, oh, no, don't give us another reading book.
Well, trust me, I tell stories.
Everything I do is through narrative.
And I've got some fabulous stories that I'm working on.
Isn't that wonderful that they're all still sort of bubbling up within you?
I'll...
And I've got two or three more beyond that.
Oh, that's wonderful.
Let's do this.
We'll concentrate on every book that's reader right now.
Well, I'm so glad you've been here this morning to share with us your thoughts.
The book is called A Splendor of Letters, and the author is Nicholas Basbaines.
The subtitle of the book, The Permanence of Books in an Impermanent World.
What a pleasure to talk with you.
you so much, Diane.
My pleasure.
Thank you.
And thanks for listening.
I'm Diane Rehm.
The Diane Rehm Show is produced by Sandra Pinkert, Elizabeth Terry, Ann Adams, Nancy Robertson, and Jonathan Smith.
The engineer is Jada White.
Dorianisman has been on the phones.
The program comes to you from American University in Washington.